.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.TH BDFS.CONF 5 "2026-04-25" "btrfs-dwarfs-framework" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
bdfs.conf \- configuration file for the BTRFS+DwarFS framework
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/bdfs/bdfs.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bdfs.conf
is an INI-style configuration file read by
.BR bdfs_daemon (8)
at startup and by the
.BR bdfs (1)
CLI for tool path resolution.
.PP
The file is divided into sections introduced by a bracketed header such as
.BR [daemon] .
Each section contains
.I key = value
pairs.
Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.
Unknown keys and sections are silently ignored, so older configuration files
remain valid after upgrades.
.PP
If the file does not exist, all defaults apply.
After editing, restart the daemon:
.PP
.RS
.B systemctl restart bdfs_daemon
.RE
.SH SECTIONS
.SS [daemon]
Core daemon process settings.
.TP
.B ctl_device
Path to the bdfs kernel module control device.
Default:
.IR /dev/bdfs_ctl .
.TP
.B socket_path
Unix domain socket for CLI \(laarrow\(ra daemon communication.
Default:
.IR /run/bdfs/daemon.sock .
.TP
.B state_dir
Directory for persistent daemon state: job queue, image metadata, private
FUSE mountpoints, and the DwarFS image index.
Default:
.IR /var/lib/bdfs .
.TP
.B worker_threads
Number of worker threads for the job queue.
.B 0
= auto-detect (min(nproc, 8)).
Default:
.IR 0 .
.TP
.B mkdwarfs_timeout
Maximum seconds allowed for a
.BR mkdwarfs (1)
child process before the daemon sends SIGTERM (then SIGKILL after 5 s).
Applies to workspace DELETE shutdown jobs and manual
.B bdfs demote
operations.
Default:
.I 2700
(45 minutes).
.TP
.B shutdown_log
Path to the append-only JSONL workspace shutdown event log.
Each line is a JSON object with fields:
.IR timestamp ,
.IR workspace_path ,
.IR reason ,
.IR outcome ,
.IR duration_ms ,
.IR archive_path ,
.IR archive_cid .
Default:
.IR /var/log/bdfs/workspace-shutdown.jsonl .
.TP
.B kubo_api
Kubo HTTP RPC API base URL used by
.B bdfs-pin-helper
when pinning DwarFS archives to IPFS after a workspace DELETE shutdown.
Set to an empty string to disable IPFS pinning.
Default:
.IR http://127.0.0.1:5001 .
.SS [tools]
Paths to external tool binaries.
If a key is unset, the daemon searches
.BR $PATH .
.TP
.B mkdwarfs
Creates DwarFS compressed filesystem images.
Required for
.B bdfs demote
and workspace DELETE shutdown jobs.
.TP
.B dwarfs
FUSE driver for mounting DwarFS images read-only.
Required for
.B bdfs mount
and blend layer operations.
.TP
.B dwarfsextract
Extracts DwarFS image contents to a directory.
Required for
.B bdfs promote
and
.BR "bdfs fetch \-\-cid" .
.TP
.B dwarfsck
Verifies DwarFS image integrity (checksum + metadata).
Required for
.BR "bdfs verify" .
.TP
.B btrfs
BTRFS userspace tools (btrfs-progs).
Required for snapshot, subvolume, and send/receive operations.
.TP
.B fuse_overlayfs
Userspace overlay filesystem driver.
Required for blend layer mounts when the
.B bdfs_blend
kernel module is not loaded and
.B userspace_fallback
is true.
.TP
.B pin_helper
Path to the
.B bdfs-pin-helper
binary from the gitlab-enhanced project.
Called as a subprocess by
.B bdfs_daemon
after a successful workspace demote to pin the DwarFS archive to IPFS.
If unset, the daemon searches
.B $PATH
for
.IR bdfs-pin-helper .
Install with:
.B make install-pin-helper
.SS [defaults]
Default parameters for DwarFS operations.
All can be overridden per-command with CLI flags.
.TP
.B compression
Default DwarFS compression algorithm.
Options:
.BR zstd " (default), " lzma ", " lz4 ", " brotli ", " none .
.TP
.B block_size_bits
DwarFS block size as log2(bytes).
.I 22
= 4 MiB blocks (default).
Larger blocks improve compression ratio but increase mount memory usage.
Valid range: 12\(en28.
.TP
.B cache_size_mb
DwarFS FUSE mount block cache size in MiB.
.I 0
= use the dwarfs built-in default (256 MiB).
.SS [blend]
Settings for the bdfs blend layer \(em a union mount presenting a DwarFS
read-only lower layer and a BTRFS read-write upper layer as one filesystem.
.TP
.B writeback
Allow writes to propagate to the BTRFS upper layer.
Default:
.IR true .
.TP
.B lazy_load
Defer DwarFS image mounting until first file access inside the blend.
Reduces startup latency for large images.
Default:
.IR true .
.TP
.B userspace_fallback
Fall back to
.B fuse-overlayfs
when the
.B bdfs_blend
kernel module is absent (returns ENODEV).
Set to
.I false
to treat a missing kernel module as a hard error.
Default:
.IR true .
.SS [autosnap]
Configuration for the autosnap package-manager hook.
.B autosnap
takes a BTRFS snapshot before each package operation (apt, dnf, pacman).
Full autosnap configuration is in
.IR /etc/autosnap.conf ;
these keys control the bdfs-specific behaviour.
.TP
.B max_snapshots
Maximum autosnap snapshots to retain per partition.
.I 0
= unlimited.
Default:
.IR 5 .
.TP
.B partition_uuid
UUID of the bdfs partition to snapshot on each package operation.
Leave empty to use the first partition from
.BR "bdfs partition list" .
.TP
.B demote_on_prune
Archive pruned autosnap snapshots as DwarFS images before deletion.
Equivalent to
.BR "bdfs snapshot prune \-\-demote\-first" .
Requires
.B bdfs_daemon
running and
.B mkdwarfs
installed.
Default:
.IR false .
.TP
.B demote_compression
Compression algorithm for autosnap demote-on-prune archives.
Same options as
.B [defaults] compression.
Default:
.IR zstd .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/bdfs/bdfs.conf
Default configuration file location.
Override with the
.B \-C
flag:
.B bdfs_daemon \-C /path/to/bdfs.conf
.TP
.I /var/log/bdfs/workspace-shutdown.jsonl
Default workspace shutdown event log (see
.BR shutdown_log ).
.TP
.I /var/lib/bdfs/
Default daemon state directory (see
.BR state_dir ).
.SH EXAMPLES
Enable IPFS pinning with a remote Kubo node:
.PP
.RS
.nf
[daemon]
kubo_api = http://192.168.1.10:5001
pin_helper = /usr/local/bin/bdfs-pin-helper
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use lzma compression for archival-quality workspace snapshots:
.PP
.RS
.nf
[defaults]
compression = lzma
block_size_bits = 24
.fi
.RE
.PP
Disable IPFS pinning and increase mkdwarfs timeout for large workspaces:
.PP
.RS
.nf
[daemon]
kubo_api =
mkdwarfs_timeout = 7200
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bdfs (1),
.BR bdfs_daemon (8),
.BR mkdwarfs (1),
.BR dwarfs (1),
.BR dwarfsextract (1),
.BR btrfs (8)
.SH AUTHORS
OpenOS Project <hello@openos.dev>
